Replace Surrogates with Custom Serializers (#83)
google/kotlin-fhir: README.md

in [R4](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/json.html#primitive)). As a result, the Kotlin data class of any
FHIR resource or element containing primitive data types cannot be directly mapped to JSON.

To address this, the library generates one hand-rolled `KSerializer` per FHIR type (e.g.
`PatientSerializer`). Each serializer describes the flat FHIR JSON wire shape via
`buildClassSerialDescriptor` — one descriptor slot per wire key, including the `_field` sidecar
keys for primitive extensions (e.g. `gender` + `_gender`). Encode and decode stream field-by-field
through kotlinx's `CompositeEncoder` / `CompositeDecoder`: no intermediate surrogate instance, no
`JsonObject` materialization, no flatten/unflatten pass. The same body services both
`StreamingJsonDecoder` and `JsonTreeDecoder` — kotlinx picks the decoder, the generated serializer

> just walks its composite.

Reviewer: i think mentioning explicitly no surrogate instance and no flattening / unflattnening is a bit odd here, because the pattern has been revised and there's no need for the reader to know that we used to use sorrogates.

i think maybe a better way to write this is to simply put this in a footnote...

footnote: the library used to use surrogate pattern to serialize / deserialize, but the pattern was removed in issue xx for better performance and greater flexibility etc etc etc....

this way i think the main text will read better.

Author: those 2 sentences were removed, reads better without them.

That was the last occurance of `surrogate` in the entire code base (outside of some FHIR valuesets)

> Choice types (e.g. `Patient.multipleBirth`) are expanded into per-arm keys on the same flat

Reviewer: what do you mean by arm?

Author: value[x] expansions I'm not really sure if there is a more universal name

Author: New name is now `choiceTypeExpansionName` and other variants

descriptor (`multipleBirthBoolean`, `_multipleBirthBoolean`, `multipleBirthInteger`,

> `_multipleBirthInteger`, …). On encode, the parent serializer dispatches on the sealed subclass

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_multipleBirthInteger`, …). Upon encoding, the parent serializer dispatches on the sealed subclass
```

> via a `when` over the arm types and writes the matched arm's keys directly into the parent's

Reviewer: I don't think we need to get into the details of how the code is actually written :) no need to mention `when` clause is used.

Author: All the KotlinPoet stuff is claude code (cause ugh.. minus a few things it sturglged with). ReadMe went through a few rounds but in the end i had to hand write most the changes so sorry if there are typos.
The actual Polymorphic serialization stuff was done by me (AI not good enough, welll... Its good enough once u start but it struggles on that initial design)

anyway I'll give it another once over

Reviewer: Maybe you misread what I wrote? I mean clause not claude :)

I meant, in this readme file let's keep at a higher level, and do not get into the details of the code. In this case instead of saying `when` clause... just say the "serializer chooses the correct choice type" or something similar.

Author: i did indeed misread lol.  too much astigmatism.

The `when` part is gone. It still shows in the mermaid chart but it looks a lot cleaner there.

synthesized via the companion `from(…)` factory during model construction. This sidesteps the
[JVM constructor argument limit](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se19/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.3.3)
that would otherwise be hit on FHIR fields with many possible types (e.g.,
[ElementDefinition.pattern](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/elementdefinition-definitions.html#ElementDefinition.pattern_x_))
because each arm is an individual descriptor slot rather than a constructor parameter.

By default, Kotlin only adds class discriminators for polymorphic types. This doesn't quite follow
FHIR specification as even standalone FHIR resources (i.e. `Patient`) require `resourceType`. To
solve this, polymorphic `Resource` dispatch (choosing `Patient` vs `Observation` vs … based on the
`resourceType` discriminator) is handled by `ResourcePolymorphicSerializer`. Each concrete resource
ships two serializers: the standalone `XSerializer` (descriptor includes `resourceType`, used when
the static type is the concrete class) and `XPolymorphicSerializer` (descriptor omits
`resourceType`, used as the dispatch target on the polymorphic path so kotlinx-json can inject the

> class discriminator without colliding):

Reviewer: i think this point can be explained differently.

1. there're 2 ways to serialize
2. you can tell the compiler the static resource type, so it'll use the static serlaizer
3. you can also let the ResourcePolymorphicSerializer decide the resource type at runtime. in this case, the kotlinx-json library will add the resource type as a class descriminator. this means the corresponding serializer we generate per-type doesn't include the resource type field in its descriptor to avoid clashing with the kotlinx-json libary

Author: I reworded it a little in latest.

-----

There are two ways to serialize a resource, and the caller picks which by the static type of the
value handed to kotlinx. When the static type is the concrete class (i.e.
`json.encodeToString(patient)`), kotlinx dispatches directly to `PatientSerializer`, whose
descriptor includes `resourceType` at slot 0 and which writes it itself.

When the static type is `Resource` (i.e. `json.encodeToString<Resource>(patient)`), kotlinx routes through
`ResourcePolymorphicSerializer`, which looks up the concrete subclass and delegates to
`PatientPolymorphicSerializer`. On this path kotlinx-json itself injects `resourceType` as the
class discriminator, so `PatientPolymorphicSerializer`'s descriptor must omit `resourceType`.

// mermaid

This parallel serialization approach is due to a mismatch in how Kotlinx serialization encodes class discriminators versus FHIR Standards.
FHIR requires all `Resource` type classes to contain `resourceType`, but Kotlin only adds it when the underlying static inline Type is `Resource`.

// mermaid

}
```

### Non Json Serializers

The FHIR Resource models work with any serializer, but only JSON is tested against the FHIR Spec.

> Other formats can change version to version due to drift in the indexing.

Reviewer: i think this point needs to be expanded.

Author: I'll add something.

In its current form for any binary format (like Protobuf) the structure is determined by the Index ID of the descriptor.

If for whatever reason it changes the index (i.e. the  FHIR -> Model code gen shifts the order of fields) then the serialization drifts.

This means to call "Protobuf" stable we would want some sorta doc which maps the descriptor fields to numbers, so that they can't drift even if the order within the model changes.

Currently, I added some protobuf tests in the tests but this was just to make sure the index machinery worked correctly (this is also why `__off` was added as it would be bugged otherwise.... JSON doesnt care about indexes).

Author: New section

```markdown

### Non-JSON Serializers

The FHIR Resource models work with any serializer, but only
[JSON](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/json.md) is extensively
tested and considered stable. Formats like `CBOR` should work fine, but are not currently tested.

Binary formats such as `protobuf` are reliant on the internal indexing of the serializer
descriptors. While these indexes are deterministically generated, they are arbitrary and not
currently guaranteed to be stable across kotlin-fhir versions. This means using `protobuf` is not
guaranteed to be wire compatible across versions of `kotlin-fhir`.

```

### Serialization and deserialization

Each generated FHIR class carries a hand-rolled `KSerializer` via `@Serializable(with = ...)`, so a
plain [kotlinx.serialization](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization) `Json` instance can
encode and decode FHIR resources directly:

```kotlin
import dev.ohs.fhir.model.r4.OperationOutcome
import dev.ohs.fhir.model.r4.Patient
import dev.ohs.fhir.model.r4.Resource
import kotlinx.serialization.encodeToString
import kotlinx.serialization.json.Json

val example = """
    {
      "resourceType": "Patient",
      "id": "example",
      "name": [
        {
          "use": "official",
          "family": "Doe",
          "given": ["Jane"]
        }
      ],
      "gender": "female",
      "birthDate": "1985-03-15"
    }
""".trimIndent()

val json = Json {
    // configure Json here
    // https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/json.md#json-configuration

>     // note that most configs are ignored for FHIR resources

Reviewer: we shouldn't be advising the user to configure the json here if most configs are going to be ignored.

we should just say use the default Json() object.

or, we should say which configs are not ignored.

Author: > we shouldn't be advising the user to configure the json here if most configs are going to be ignored.

Ah, so this is actually motivated by some internal use cases of ours... And actually a big reason why I started this refactor.

Say we want to return something from a microservice 

And you do something like this
```kotlin
sealed class ApiResponse { 
    data class Success(val resource: Resource)
    data class Failure(val message)
}
```

This refactor allows this to happen, and like magic its valid.

```json5
{
   "type": "Success"
   "resource": {
        "resourceType": "Encounter"
        // ...
    }
}
```

Whereas before you would eitheir need to use `JsonElement` or `String`.

In other words customizing the Json is an intentional design choice, and the dev can customize it to their own use case knowing the Fhir resources will always conform to FHIR spec no matter how they shape their own domain. There is even a new set of tests for this called `JsonConfigurationTest` for this exact use case.

Well mostly. some things will break it, but the common cases all work

 ---

| Setting | Affect |
|---|---|
| `prettyPrint` | cosmetic |
| `prettyPrintIndent` | cosmetic |
| `ignoreUnknownKeys` | Yes |
| `isLenient` | Yes |
| `allowComments` | Yes |
| `allowTrailingComma` | Yes |
| `classDiscriminator` | No <-- the big one |
| `classDiscriminatorMode` | Yes |
| `useArrayPolymorphism` | Yes |
| `namingStrategy` | Yes  |
| `encodeDefaults` | No |
| `explicitNulls` | No |
| `coerceInputValues` | No |
| `useAlternativeNames` | No |
| `decodeEnumsCaseInsensitive` | No |
| `allowStructuredMapKeys` | No |
| `allowSpecialFloatingPointValues` | No |
| `serializersModule` | No |

Author: New block just lists the table

```markdown
val json = Json {
    // configure Json here
    // https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/json.md#json-configuration

    // These configurations have no effect on FHIR serialization/deserialization by design
    // explicitNulls, encodeDefaults, useAlternativeNames,
    // serializersModule (assuming you don't override FHIR resources), classDiscriminator

    // These configurations can affect how serialization occurs, but are generally compatible with FHIR
    // ignoreUnknownKeys, isLenient, allowComments, allowTrailingComma, prettyPrintIndent,
    // coerceInputValues, decodeEnumsCaseInsensitive

    // Changing these will break FHIR wire compatibility
    // useArrayPolymorphism, namingStrategy
}
```
